---
layout: chaptersummary
title: Chapter 33-35
part: 2
chapter: 33
pnum: 435
nav: true
highlights: Prophecy
---

These chapters serve to establish Moses' superiority as a Prophet. 
> in my opinion, the term prophet is applied to Moses and other men homonymously. A similar distinction, I think, must be made between the miracles wrought by Moses and those wrought by other prophets, for his signs are not of the same class as the miracles of other prophets.

What exactly is the distinction between the miracles attributed to Moses and the miracles attributed to other Prophets? "no prophet will ever, like Moses, do signs publicly in the presence of friend and enemy, of his followers and his opponents". Moreover, he also appears to 'naturalize' the miracles of other Prophets when he indicates that the miracle attributed to Joshua [Joshua 10: 13](https://www.sefaria.org/Joshua.10.13?lang=bi&with=all&lang2=en) "indicates that that day appeared to the people at Gibeon as their longest day in the summer".

Thus, most of his discussion about what Prophecy is, will not apply to Moses but to the ordinary Prophets. The claim is that Moses alone was spoken to directly by God; all other prophets received their revelation through the intermediary of an angel. This point seems to be made --- at least in these chapters --- by appeal to Scriptural authority, rather than using rational arguments.

This point seems to be made directly by the Pentateuch, in [Numbers 12: 6-8](https://www.sefaria.org/Numbers.12.6?lang=bi&with=all&lang2=en): "With him I speak mouth to mouth, plainly and not in riddles, and he behold the likeness of יהוה".
