---
layout: page
title: Chapter 52
order: 13
nav: true
---

Affirmative attributes can be ...
1. a _definition_
2. _part of a definition_
3. something different from its true eseence (_kharij 'an haqiqatih_ خارج عن حقيقته), i.e., a _quality_. These can be of four kinds:
    1. intellectual or moral qualities
    2. physical qualities
    3. passive qualities or emotions
    4. qualities resulting from quantity
4. express the _relation_ of that object to something else
5. describe existent _actions_ of the object

For each of these five possibilities, Maimonides painstakingly examines whether or not we can admit attributes of that kind to God. His judgements are:
1. "it is a well-known principle, received by all the philosophers who are precise in their statements (Atay has النظار المحصلين), that no definition can be given of God."
2. "all agree that this kind of description is inappropriate in reference to God; for if we were to speak of a portion of His essence, we hsould consider His essence to be a compound.
3. According to Maimonides, qualities of this kind are not admissible for God because "quality, in its most general sense, is an accident. If God could be described in this way, He would be the substratum of accidents (_mahall al-a'rad_ محل الأعراض)". He then examines each of the four kinds of qualities:
    1. intellectual or moral qualities: e.g., someone could be described by their profession (e.g., carpenter) or by their characteristics ('one who shrinks from sin'). These qualities may be great or small, good or bad; Maimonides is not prepared to admit any of them whatsover. Significantly, the example he gives here includes one of the 99 names of God in Islam: "... nor does it make a difference whether we say 'sin-fearing' (_al-'afif_ العفيف) or 'merciful' (_al-raheem_ الرحيم)"
    2. God is not corporeal, so physical qualities are out of the question.
    2. God "is not affected by external influences, and therefore does not possess any quality resulting from emotion".
    4. God is not a quantity, so he cannot have qualities like 'long', 'short', 'large', 'small', etc.
4. continue the list
5. continue the list
