---
layout: page
title: Chapter 61-62
part: 1
chapter: 61
order: 22
nav: true
highlights: names of God
---

In the Hebrew scriptures, many names are ascribed to God, which could be seen as attributes. However, Maimonides believes that all these names describe actions of God. The only name of God which actually attempts to describe the 'essence' of God --- such as it is --- is the Tetragrammaton YHWH. He speculates that in the Hebrew language "of which we have now but a slight knolwedge", the name may have signified something along the lines of "absolute existence" with no other signification. This might explain the sacredness of the name, which of course cannot be pronounced except in the Holy of Holies in the Temple. 

In ordinary language, we have no good way of referring to God in his capacity as existence _qua_ existence; instead, we make do with attributive names because ordinary people find it difficult to conceive of something without attributes.

Maimonides seems to link the many legends associated with the name of God --- e.g., that the ancient sages knew its pronunciation, and transmitted it across the generations by teaching it to a distinguished disciple every seven years, or that there was an additional twelve-letter name in addition to YHWH --- to the idea that in the present day, most people are unaware of the true knolwedge of God that is contained in this name. This true knolwedge consists in the fact that God is pure and simple existence, and not a substratum of attributes.